[music]
>> The cancer cells require the two fuels,
the fermentation fuels. Um and they
can't grow
and they can't grow without these two
fuels.
So, they can't use anything else.
[snorts] So, uh metabolic therapy
restricts those two fuels
uh killing many many tumor cells and
making other parts of uh treatments more
much more effective. So, without those
fuels, you can't make new lipids,
proteins, or nucleic acids. You you have
to You need building blocks. Number one,
you need building blocks and number two,
you need energy. And without energy,
nothing can grow. Nothing can live. Um
How do we know that? Because uh we we
know cyanide is a poison. Um
uh People who take cyanide are dead
instantly. Uh because cyanide shuts down
all the energy in the cell. Okay? And
you die. Without energy, you die.
Cancer cells require energy, but they
use an alternative form. They use
substrate level phosphorylation,
basically a fermentation metabolism,
rather than oxidative phosphorylation.
And we have found and published that uh
the glutamine can generate energy in the
mitochondria using a substrate level
phosphorylation or a fermentation
metabolism to replace the lost energy
from oxidative phosphorylation.
Interestingly enough, if a person has a
tumor Uh uh This was done by Warburg and
others and us, too. Um and give the give
the animal the cyanide uh it it kills
the mouse or the host, but not the
tumor. The tumor can live without
oxidative phosphorylation. So, that
tells us it must ferment. What does it
ferment? Glucose and glutamine. How do
you know this? Because we tested it. We
we took away We tested all the different
amino acids to see which one is the most
effective. And glutamine is the most
effective. So, you target the glutamine
and take away the glucose and transition
to ketones, the tumor cells die.
They they can't live. Uh
and then um then you know how to manage
the cancer. It's it's not that it's not
that complicated. It's made it was made
to be complicated, massively
complicated, because people thought
cancer is a genetic disease. And there's
millions of different kinds of mutations
making a bewilderingly complicated
disease. But when you look at it based
on the energy and bioenergetics, it's a
very simple disease. It's driven by
fermentation.
And then you say, "Well, well, if that's
known, uh why don't we target
fermentation metabolism in cancer
patients and manage the disease?" And
the answer is because the field thinks
cancer is a genetic disease. It's a
They're brainwashed into thinking it's
something other than what it is. And
therefore, we get 1,700 people a day
dying needlessly from this.
Or and around the world as well. So, um
I mean, it's the most it's the greatest
tragedy in the history of medicine. I I
I I just once people wake up to realize
what I am saying
people are going to just be so mortified
by the fact that we had it we had a
process we have we have a way right now
to drop this death rate and and keep
people alive longer and we are not doing
that.
Can you stop tumor growth just by
lowering the blood sugar? It doesn't
stop growing completely because unless
you target the glutamine, it's going to
continue it can live. It might not grow
very much. It grows much slower. So, you
can you can take a very angry and
inflamed, rapidly growing tumor and
lower the blood sugar and the tumor
grows much slower. It becomes less angry
and less inflamed. Uh
but it doesn't necessarily go away
completely. Uh
we've had people that have had these
tumors in their body for years.
Um
It's always there, but never going away,
but not not so aggressive or or lethal.
I remember I read a paper where you
published where the higher the blood
sugar, the faster the tumor grows and
the lower the blood sugar, the slower
the tumor grows. Uh yes. We were the
first, I think, to publish this back in
uh where we showed a direct relationship
between how high blood sugar is and how
fast the mouse tumor in the brain would
grow. So, we showed that the lower the
sugar, the slower the growth and the
higher the sugar, glucose, of course,
the faster the tumor growth. Then, we
started to see many of similar kinds of
studies done in humans with all kinds of
different cancers. Breast cancer, colon
cancer, brain cancer. Uh
uh the higher the sugar, the more
rapidly the tumor would grow.
And the lower the sugar, the less
rapidly the tumor would grow. Um and it
was published in many many papers
uh showing this relationship uh between
the level of blood sugar and and how
fast the tumor would grow. And this is
why I don't understand how some
oncologists or even physicians would say
that glucose has nothing to do
uh with the growth of the tumor. It
absolutely does. It's in the literature.
A big problem, another reason why we're
not making any advances, is the people
who should know the information never
were never told of the information, nor
did they read the scientific literature.
Um so, that's another reason why we have
this uh catastrophe in cancer is that
people don't either don't read the
scientific literature or even worse,
don't even understand it. So, um and
then we have the tragedy. What blood
sugar level did you observe where the
tumor doesn't grow? That that goes to
the glucose ketone index calculator. And
uh the Don't forget um
the brain is largely responsible for
taking in most of the sugar in our body.
Okay? The brain.
Um However, the brain can switch over to
ketone bodies when you lower blood
sugar.
So, but the cancer cell can't switch
over. So, this is the difference. So,
many of our heart and muscles and things
like this, they can all switch to
ketones and fatty acids while you lower
blood sugar.
But the brain, even when you lower blood
sugar
uh the brain will take what's available
before any other organ will. The last
group of cells that will get the sugar
will be the cancer. Because if you
exercise, muscle takes sugar out of the
bloodstream to build glycogen and burns
it in the muscle, the brain takes
whatever the what's available.
And the cancer cells are the last one to
take what's left. So, even if you lower
your blood sugar down to um a low GKI,
glucose ketone index is what we call it.
Uh what the Oh, you say, "Well, you
didn't get rid of all your glucose."
That's true, because the muscle and the
brain needed uh before the tumor cell
needs it. So, the last the last cells to
get it are the tumor cells. So, when you
lower down the brain and the muscles are
going to take what little you have in
there and the tumor cells are going to
get much much less and they're going to
die.
So, uh exercise and low GKI puts a
tremendous uh uh
a stress on the availability of the
tumor cell to survive. And then you
simply come in with a drug that targets
the glutamine and you slaughter these
tumor cells. Slaughter them. So, um and
you keep the body healthy while you're
doing this. And gradually, the tumor
gets smaller and smaller and more
indolent and more indolent where a
surgical procedure or radiation
procedure or some final procedure with
an immunotherapy could potentially
potentially cure the disease,
potentially. But you put the metabolic
pressure first and then you come in with
the other strategies to remove the final
survivors. And which type of exercise do
you find better in lowering cancer?
Cardio or strengthening or a combination
of both? Probably a combination of both.
Um and you measure the
glucose ketone index while you're doing
while you're doing this as well. Um so,
yes, it's a combination of both because
you're moving muscles. Muscles take in
glucose from the bloodstream. So, the
more exercise you give, whether it's
aerobic or or static weights or whatever
you want to do um it's all effective.
And can you reach the ketogenic status
without the ketogenic diet through other
diet like fiber rich diet? Well, you can
get It's again, how what what diet do
you need to bring your GKI down, the
glucose ketone index. Um as I said, any
diet can do that. Uh
if you're a carnivore, you can do it
just eating meat uh because there's very
no carbohydrates in the meat, very very
little. Um so, but you'd have to then
slowly restrict uh because you have to
get Where you going to get your ketones?
Uh yes, fat would certainly bring it in,
but um your body will start mobilizing
fat, stored fat in our adipocytes, and
they will go to the liver, the fat fatty
acids, and the liver will make ketone
bodies. So, um if you don't bring
carbohydrates into your body uh you have
to then generate carbohydrate from
burning other fuels in the liver. And
the liver will produce a small amount of
carbohydrate
uh through gluconeogenesis.
But the brain will gobble that up if you
have low glucose. The brain and the
muscles will gobble The tumor cell will
not be able to get much
uh from from that. So, but you can you
can get a low GKI with a Mediterranean
diet, uh carnivore diet, uh
a vegetarian diet, a fish diet. Doesn't
make any difference what you eat. You
would just measure your blood ketone
index, the glucose ketone index.
A ketogenic diet is simply a diet that
has a lot more fat than protein or
carbs. That's one kind of diet, but a
cardio a carnivore diet. And then and
then each person is a unique metabolic
machine, a metabolic uh machine. So,
what what a diet that may work good for
one person may not be good for another
person. That's why we use the GKI as a
marker to determine
whether you're going to put pressure on
your tumor regardless of what diet you
eat.
And people say, "Oh, I can't get a GKI
low. You said 2.0. I can never do."
Well, then go on water fasting for
crying out loud. That'll bring it down.
You know, it'll bring and then add stuff
back and see, "Oh, I'm starting to eat
this particular food and it's not rising
my GKI, then good. That's a kind of a
food." All the foods regardless must be
balanced in macro and micronutrients as
well, so you don't cause a an imbalance.
And if someone cannot tolerate ketogenic
diet and wants to reach this ketogenic
state, what can they eat? You know, it
depends on each person. Some people
can't tolerate ketogenic diets, but they
can tolerate
a carnivore diet
or a fish diet. Uh it depends on the
person. What is the best way to keep the
person
uh relatively happy or not stressed out
and killing cancer cells? And everybody
has to determine that for themselves.
They always ask me, "Oh, what He never
said what to eat." I cannot tell you
what to eat because you might be
different from the other guy. He Oh, he
said to eat that and I ate that, it
didn't work and he ate that and it
worked. Just use your glucose ketone
index with the Keto Mojo meter and
you'll know what you can and cannot eat
and that the varies from one person to
the next. So,
as I said, if you have a diet that's
balanced appropriately in micro and
macronutrients and low in highly
processed carbs, it's probably pretty
good for you. Eat little bit of it and
see what it does to your GKI.
And then you'll know whether or not
you're in the zone of of therapeutic
ketosis, which is healthy keeping your
mitochondria healthy, reducing oxygen
free radicals, and reducing the risk for
cancer and other chronic diseases.
What about a diet that lowers glutamine?
Diet will not lower glutamine. Exercise
can lower glutamine a little bit, but no
diet can lower glutamine. Diet can lower
glucose, but a diet cannot lower
glutamine. Therefore, it's a press pulse
and the pulsing comes from drugs.
What are some of the agents that lower
glutamine and which one did you find to
be the most effective? Well, you can
lower We actually found that the drug
6-diazo-5-oxonorleucine,
it
That's the In our In our In our
research, that's the most effective so
far. Um which targets the ability of
glutamine to be metabolized to
glutamate. So, it blocks the blocks that
first metabolic step. Uh that drug was
in fact used for many years on children
and people with different cancers, but
it was discontinued
because they said it was toxic. Uh it's
not as toxic as the red devil
doxorubicin and all these horrible
chemicals.
Um
uh it's off patent, so you people can't
make money on it. Uh but the other thing
too is when they did use DON, which is
diazo-5-oxonorleucine,
they never targeted glucose. They didn't
They didn't do it right. They didn't do
it right. And they didn't transition the
body to ketones. Um and therefore the
the the most important drug that we know
of to manage cancer is not being used
because they didn't do it right. So, uh
but there the drug companies are making
other drugs
um that can target glutamine. And these
are coming on the market, but they don't
target the glucose and put the body in
nutritional ketosis when they're using
their drugs. So, the effect efficacy of
these drugs can be some efficacy for
sure, but they're not going to be
maximum unless you target the glucose
when the body is in nutritional ketosis.
Uh
How is that hard so hard to understand?
The I'll tell you one reason. They want
to make money on the drug and they have
to show that the drug by itself has
therapeutic benefit. But if I put So,
it's more important to make the money
than it is to keep the person alive.
This is the bottom line. So, people have
to know that. Uh
uh
I'm more interested in seeing how long I
can keep people alive because that to me
tells me we know what we're doing. Uh
and it's the use of different drugs,
different diets, different procedures
that help each person as a unique
individual live longer
uh with a stage four cancer or any kind
of cancer for that matter. So, I'm more
interested in keeping people alive than
making money.
I have a job. I make money from my job.
I don't need to make a billion dollars.
All I have to do is keep people alive.
What's wrong with that? Yeah, thank you
for that. That's why so many people
follow you.
Do you find the metabolic therapy to be
effective in certain types of cancer and
to be less effective in other types of
cancer? I think it works with all kinds
of cancers equally. Um maybe you have to
modify it slightly. We just published a
big paper for
managing glioblastoma, a terrible brain
tumor. A very very comprehensive uh
protocol treatment protocol with myself
and Dr. Thomas Seyfried is the first
author and many of our colleagues, MDs
and PhDs and nutritionists on the same
paper. And And we we we went through all
of the different ways in which we can
reduce
the growth of rapidly growing
glioblastoma and and put it under under
control. Um but the reason why the diet
targets glucose and glutamine while
transitioning the body off to ketosis.
Since every major cancer that we have
looked at has the same problem
metabolically, they can't they're
dependent on a fermentation and they
have defective number structure and
function of mitochondria.
I predict, and where it has been done,
in lung cancer, colon cancer,
uh breast cancer, yes, metabolic therapy
will be the standard of care for all
major cancers. Once
once the ideological dogma, once we get
rid of the dogma so that cancer is a
genetic disease, we'll start to really
come after it, all these major cancers,
and we will drop the death rate
significantly
uh if if this were to be started in the
way we have defined the
and and designed the the the treatment
protocol.
And I believe I read an article where
you looked under the electron microscope
for the majority types of cancer. Uh
could you tell us what were your
observation?
>> Well, I didn't do that, but I went back
for those people that did do that.
Uh the work on the electron microscopy,
you can't see mitochondria very clearly
with a light microscope. Um even at
400x, 400 times, you can't You can just
see specs and things. But in order to
see the organelle really close up, you
need electron microscopy. So, when
electron microscopy became
available in the 1950s and '60s and
'70s, when they constantly perfected
this instrument, um many pathologists
and scientists were simply excited to
look at the different structure of of
organelles under the electron
microscope.
And and they didn't really
um know the significance of what they
were looking at. Most of them, of
course, did.
But you found mitochondria that were
broken. You found mitochondria that were
abnormal in structure. Uh many many You
have sometimes you have no very very few
mitochondria. Other times you have
tremendous numbers, but they're all
morphologically abnormal.
And in in our understanding of biology,
structure determines function. So, if
the structure of the organelle is
abnormal, the function of the
organelle will be abnormal. And what is
the function of the the organelle
mitochondria? It's to produce energy
efficiently so the cell can maintain
a homeostatic differentiated state. Um
so, all the tumors that we have looked
at that others have looked at and
reported uh
have all shown abnormalities in the
number structure of the mitochondria.
And then when you take the mitochondria
out of the cell and you begin to study
the mitochondria separately, you find
it's functionally abnormal as well.
So, that's telling us that the very
organelle responsible for maintaining
homeostasis is abnormal causing the cell
to fall back on a fermentation dependent
on glucose and glutamine. So, so that's
the linkage. It determines function.
When the structure of the organelle is
abnormal, the function will be abnormal
and that will cause the cell to rely on
a fermentation metabolism to grow.
Dysregulated cell growth driven by a
fermentation metabolism because the
organelle that's supposed to maintain
differentiation
and and metabolic homeostasis is
damaged, is abnormal.
And could you talk to us, please, about
the experiment where they took the
nucleus from a cancer cells and put it
in a normal cell and took the nucleus
from a normal cell and put it in a
cancerous cell? The nuclear
mitochondrial transfer experiments Yes.
were were were telling us
that if you take the nucleus
uh out of the tumor cell, uh
isolate the nucleus from the cytoplasm
uh of a tumor cell
and uh put that nucleus into the
cytoplasm of a normal cell
and then put that cell under the skin of
a rat,
uh you don't get You don't get
uh any growth. You don't Whatever
Whatever happened uh suppressed the
Whatever was in the nucleus that was
thought to cause dysregulated growth it
was was was reduced was removed. On the
other hand, if you take the nucleus
uh
of the normal cell
and put it into the cytoplasm of a tumor
cell
and then put that under the skin of the
rat, you got dysregulated growth and a
big tumor.
So, clearly what it was telling us, it
is the mitochondria in the cytoplasm,
not the mutations in the nucleus, that
are causing the dysregulated cell
growth.
And this has been done both in vitro and
culture dishes as well as in living
animals,
frogs and mice,
all of these things. And then on the
other hand, if you take
an aggressive tumor and remove the
mitochondria from the cytoplasm and put
in new mitochondria from a normal cell,
you get a suppression of the
disregulated growth. On the other hand,
if you have an indolent tumor growing
very, very slow
and you remove the mitochondria and put
the mitochondria from the aggressive
tumor into the cytoplasm of the indolent
tumor, the indolent tumor now becomes
super aggressive. So clearly,
disregulated cell growth is due to
abnormalities in mitochondria structure
and function, not in the mutations in
the nucleus. That supports that it's a
metabolic disease rather than a genetic
disease.
The strongest evidence that we know of.
And then we also know that you have to
realize in the genetic
dogma that you have many thousands of
different kinds of mutations that can be
found in tumor cells. And not all the
mutations are considered drivers of the
disregulated growth. Only some mutations
were thought to be drivers. They call
driver because that mutation is more
important than the passenger mutation
which just doesn't do anything. So what
we're now finding. So the the genetic
field said, "Oh, cancer is a genetic
disease but only
due to driver mutations."
So if you have these drivers, that would
lead to disregulated cell growth.
But now new information is showing that
normal cells in our body, you, me,
we have mutations in driver genes that
are not causing any disregulated cell
growth. So that's another piece of
evidence that completely
disengages the gene theory. That we have
driver mutations in our body that don't
form cancer.
And now we have some cancer cells that
have no mutations. So yet they're
disregulated in the cell growth. Not too
many, very rare, but it does happen.
So so clearly, what this is telling us,
the nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments, the fact the findings of
driver gene mutations in normal cells,
all of this is telling us it's it's
cancer cannot be driven by
by by mutations. Disregulated cell
growth is not caused by somatic
mutations. And the and the germline
mutations that are risk factors, all of
the germline mutations disrupt
mitochondrial energy function. So
clearly, origin of cancer is it's a
mitochondrial metabolic disease and the
mutations that we see in cancer cells
come from the abnormal metabolism of the
mitochondria. So reactive oxygen species
are carcinogenic and mutagenic and they
are coming out of the abnormal
mitochondria
and they cause the nuclear gene
mutations and broken chromosomes and
this kind of stuff. So clearly, when you
put all the parts together, cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease driven
by a fermentation metabolism involving
glucose and glutamine and an inability
to transition over to fatty acids and
ketone bodies. How do we know that? I
did the experiments.
I showed the evidence and published the
evidence in the scientific literature.
And then you say, "Well, how come nobody
wants to
because they're dogmatic the dogma the
brain can't think when it's
indoctrinated.
And the jobs and the money and the
billions and billions of dollars locked
into a failed theory and we have 1,700
people in the United States dying every
day because the brain can't get out of
the dogmatic view. It's it's a
ideological dogma. And I tell you every
this I show you all the evidence. I did
the experiments. I show the efficacy.
Can't be true. Can't be true.
You tell me what's wrong with that
picture.
You tell me what's wrong with this
>> it's difficult to argue against anything
you said and you have explained it very
clearly.
Do you have these sort of conversation
with oncologist and what is their
reaction towards these hypotheses? They
get pissed off. A lot of them get angry.
>> [laughter]
>> They get they get angry because they
said, "I never heard this. I never
taught this in medical school."
Oh, because you haven't heard it in
medical school, that means it can't be
true? And some of them are very good.
They say, "Well, we got to learn. We
have to know what you guys know." And I
said, "Yeah, that's going to drop the
cancer death rate. That's going to
manage the disease." A lot of reasons
for why what I said cannot be accepted.
You have a multi-billion dollar industry
running on a somatic mutation theory of
the disease and it's not that and yet
everybody's making a lot of money on
this. And then you come along and say
it's a completely different disease than
what you thought. "Oh, how are we going
to make these changes?" But don't forget
we're not getting rid of standards of
care.
We're still keeping radiation chemo
surgical mutilation. Surgery can be done
as a final stage for the cure
because you can cure cancer with
surgery. If you can take out the We want
to bring the tumor down, make it less
angry, small like a wart, something
really small, less less angry, less
inflamed. And then you can surgically
debulk it. So surgery is still part of
this. Yes, we can still use radiation.
Yes, we can still use chemotherapy. You
just have to know the order in which you
need to do these things and that
requires a retraining. So an
understanding what you need to shrink
your tumor down, make it indolent,
weak and now come in with other
therapies to potentially deliver a cure.
Metabolic therapy is not likely to
call produce a cure but it can certainly
allow the combination of all of the
therapies together to lead to a cure. So
but right now we're not doing it we're
not doing it correctly. We're using
therapies
up front
based on a somatic mutation theory
that's not not effective. You got to do
you have to rearrange the order in which
you attack this tumor in the right way.
You want to make sure there is no
toxicity in the treated patient. They
they just don't know how to do what we
what we already know how to do. And once
we once our word gets out, you're going
to see incredible responses on these on
these patients. So is it going to be
quick? No, it's not going to be quick.
It could take you 6 months to a year to
to manage cancer in the in the correct
way.
But when you emerge when you emerge from
the treatment, you'll be much healthier
than you were when you started. Not only
will your cancer be under control but
your whole body your whole body will be
healthier.
Mhm.